---
layout: post
title:  "Quant finance 0: Introduction"
date:   2018-07-17 01:51:39 -0700
tag: 
- quant_finance
- post
annotater:
  -
    name: explaining-away
    tooltip: "a phenomenon that involves spurious anticorrelation between \nprecursors to events that are rare in the available data" 
---

When I first started tossing around the idea of creating a blog, I held a couple among friends to see if anyone was remotely interested in the topic areas I felt comfortable writing about. I was initially shocked by the results, as quantitative finance led the pack far and away from what I thought would be popular: things like physics, quantum computing, and data science. In retrospect, perhaps I should have expected this. Before I became a quant my understanding of my current job consisted primarily of two things: that it was extremely hard, and that it could make you a millionaire without the risk of starting your own company. The mystery that surrounded such a position only served to make it even more enticing. In that light, who wouldn’t want to peek behind the curtain?

While I’m still rather green in my career as a quantitative researcher and I’m no expert in finance of any kind, I think I’ve learned enough over the last couple years to demystify quantitative finance for the average person. My goal here will be to give a general overview of the world of quant finance, and if interest persists I’ll try to develop future posts that dive into specific areas of mathematical finance or financial modeling in greater detail. 

Before we start, I think it’s only fair that I lead with a small warning and a disclosure. Nothing you will see here is intended to be read as investment advice. I have absolutely no qualifications as a provider of personal investment advice, and no licenses to provide such advice in jurisdictions where licenses are required. I’m just a guy who does data science and machine learning at a hedge fund. Because of aforementioned position, I also won’t be able to talk too much about specific models for developing quantitative investment strategies. We’ll definitely discuss models in future posts, but mostly in the scope of historically relevant or toy models with informative properties. The landscape of quant finance is constantly changing and evolving; even if I were to share specific models with you, by the time you had them implemented and tested on historical data they may not even work any more (the reason *why* this happens is somewhat fundamental to quant finance, and will likely deserve its own post at some point).

## Quantitative Research: an Overview

The question that I’m asked the most in relation to my job is usually something like “what do you actually do” with a close second being “why would a hedge fund want to hire a physicist?” I actually think that these questions are pretty closely related, especially considering that most people probably don’t know what a physicist does on a daily basis either. While I wouldn’t call *myself* a physicist (at least, not until I go and get my PhD) many of my coworkers most certainly are. More importantly, my familiarity with academic science has actually been a useful waypoint to help navigate the world of quantitative finance. 

So what *does* a quantitative researcher (or *quant* in industry jargon) do? I’m not sure if a truly complete answer to this question is possible due to the extremely broad definition of “quant” in finance, but I can certainly answer based on my experience: a quant is a data scientist who develops models of various financial *and non-financial* phenomena, with the goal of leveraging these models in the assessment of financial risk or creation of trading systems.  

## Quants as Scientists

A quant is, in many ways, similar to a researcher in physics or mathematics. Many quants have terminal degrees in physics, statistics, or applied mathematics (and occasionally in machine learning, computer science, or engineering). The fundamental job of a researcher in natural science is to develop models for the behavior of some part of the world, and then to collect data in order to verify their model. Quants do something very similar, with the parts of the world they observe constrained to financial markets of many sorts. A quant combines the job of a theoretical physicist and an experimentalist, both developing abstract representations of real-world systems and putting those representations through the gauntlet of empirical testing. This mapping from scientific research into quantitative finance is, in my humble opinion, the fundamental reason for the preponderance of physicists and other scientists in this field. 

The other reasons that physicists pop up in quant finance (or in the opinion of some of my academic colleagues, “wash up”) essentially boil down to possession of many skills one finds useful in this domain. A huge variety of skills are useful to quants, and many teams are constructed by collecting multiple experts from different domains. Data science skills (from basic statistics to  information theory to cutting-edge machine learning techniques) are fundamental, but often insufficient on their own. Quants often perform double or triple duty as software developers and database managers, so skills related to software engineering and large-scale data engineering are important. Today’s datasets are so large that many teams require at least one HPC expert, and occasionally even a full-time quant whose only job is to acquire, clean, and store new data from the myriad financial (and non-financial) data sources available. 

## Quants as Not-really-scientists

Finally, and perhaps most importantly: financial systems are profoundly complex and noisy, so much so that any attempt to accurately model them that is not driven by a sound core hypothesis is likely to fail. This necessitates a quant team to have broad modeling experience and a deep understanding of empirical methods, as the construction of effective, repeatable research techniques is perhaps the hardest problem in quant finance.

It is this final requirement that reveals the truth: a quant is not a physicist, nor are they usually a scientist. Due to the nature of the financial problems quants are trying to solve they exist somewhere peripheral to true science. In finance it is impossible to perform controlled experiments on the real objects of study. Try as we might to collect more data or generate fantastically complex simulations, we can’t actually test the models we develop in a definitive way. The confusion of quantitative research with scientific research can actually lead to grave errors in the methodology of a quantitative researcher, as there are assumptions associated with many standard empirical approaches that are severely violated by the nature of the historical or generated data upon which quants experiment and develop models. If they are built using only historical data quantitative models can be strongly influenced by things like the explaining-away effect found in bayesian networks. This disconnect is both perplexing and informative when it comes to effective methods in quantitative finance, and it is complex enough that I think it ought to be returned to in a later entry in this series to be dealt with in appropriate depth.

If a quant is not a scientist, what are they? Perhaps there are multiple suitable answers to this question, but for our purposes I think the following will do: quants are engineers concerned with the automation and improvement of the price discovery process. In financial markets price discovery concerns the determination of the fair value for which an asset can be sold. While seemingly simple, this process actually leads to all of the rich and complex dynamics that make finance both interesting and frustrating. As a quant developing a trading system your goal is ultimately to build systems that can determine the correct price of things, so that if those things are being mispriced (generally because your system has figured out something that the rest of the market doesn’t know yet) then you can anticipate the price change and take advantage of it. You might also be working on something more related to actuarial science, where your goal is instead to assess accurately the risk associated with various decisions or investments. In either case you’ll be using large, noisy, potentially incomplete economic datasets and the best statistical techniques available to try to predict complex patterns in a constantly-shifting marketplace. Simple, right? 

## Conclusion

While quantitative research is extraordinarily challenging, the rewards attainable scale with the difficulty of the task. Most quants are employed by hedge funds and investment banks, where they’ll either develop proprietary trading strategies for use with internal capital or products to be released to outside investors. Often a component of the fees collected on such products (or the returns on internal allocations) is distributed to the quant team, which in the best case means an extremely large bonus at the end of the year. Quant salaries tend to be rather generous to begin with, so one can quickly grasp why the industry is so competitive. 

I personally ended up here almost by accident, after being offered an interview with a well-established fund due to my association with a startup I was working with while finishing school. I somehow convinced them to both hire a 19-year-old and to let him work remotely for half a year while finishing his bachelor’s degrees, and the rest is history. If the topic still seems interesting after reading such a long rant then stick around; I’ll be doing my best to share what I’ve picked up sans as much finance jargon as possible. 

[explain-away]: link to another blog post maybe?