---
layout: post
title:  "What we talk about when we talk about quant finance"
date:   2018-07-17 01:51:39 -0700
categories: quant finance
---

Most of the things I’ve read on the internet to date do a pretty poor job of describing what my experience of quantitative finance has been like, but most people don’t become quantitative analysts as 19-year-olds so perhaps my perspective isn’t the most representative. Of course, that’s not about to stop me from talking about it on the internet like I can do a better job. Here’s an example courtesy of Investopedia, to try to get at what I mean:

[Quants: The Rocket Scientists of Wall Street][investopedia-quants]

The act of calling quants “the rocket scientists of wall street” tries to convey some basic information about what kind of work a quant might do, but this kind of metaphor ends up being pretty useless for most people. After all, who actually has a good idea of what rocket scientists do for a living, other than rocket scientists and people in rocket-science-adjacent professions? This might seem like a minor quibble (let’s be honest, it is) but I think that the issues with this metaphor are representative of many of the issues I see with quantitative finance (or at least, what we talk about when we talk about quantitative finance) as a whole. Most (but certainly not all) of the resources available regarding quant finance are either intentionally vague, simplified to the point of uselessness, or complex to the point of being inaccessible to someone who isn’t already a rocket scientist. 

I’d like to see that change, so in this series of posts I aim to create some resources that ~~somehow take on all three of these characteristics simultaneously~~ provide a realistic window into the world of quantitative finance at a level of detail that is informative but not intimidating. While I don't know if I can truly succeed at that task, (quant finance *is* complicated, after all) I think that it is important that someone make an attempt. As much as practitioners might want to make it seem mysterious or impenetrable, quantitative finance is actually rather straightforward from a top-down perspective. The *implementation* is the hardest part, in my humble opinion. As such, informing people at large about the basics of the industry *doesn't* threaten the position of a competent quant, while it *does* lead to a savvier investing public and consequently a public less likely to be duped by unsound or fraudulent quantitative investing practices. 

While there are tons of things I'd like to discuss about quantitative finance on this platform, I think an appropriate place to start is where I just claimed that other sources have failed: the definition of a quant (also known as a quantitative analyst or quantitative researcher). Of course, this definition will reflect my subjective opinion on the matter, and in truth I think that many of the available resources do an adequate job of describing what an average quant *does*. Here, I'll try to explore what a quant *is*, especially in relation to another discipline that I have experience with: academic research. 

Of course, there are many job titles that may contain the words 'quantitative' or 'quant,' especially in the hedge fund and investment banking industries. This, along with the other issues I've already complained about, leads to even greater confusion when it comes to the description of quantitative finance (especially to the financial layperson). In order to capture a well-defined subsection of this landscape, I'll be talking exclusively about quantitative researchers (incidentally, my official job title). A quantitative researcher is, in many ways, similar to a researcher in physics or mathematics. In fact, many quants have terminal degrees in physics, statistics, or applied mathematics (and occasionally in machine learning, computer science, or engineering). Their fundamental job is to develop models for the behavior of some part of the world, and then to collect data in order to verify their model. A quant combines the job of a theoretical physicist and an experimentalist, both developing abstract representations of real systems and putting those representations through the gauntlet of empirical testing. This mapping from scientific research into quantitative finance is, in my humble opinion, one of the most fundamental reasons for the preponderance of physicists and other scientists in this field (the other reasons essentially boiling down to skill with complex math, statistics, optimization, and machine learning). 

However, a quant is not a physicist, nor are they usually a scientist. Due to the nature of the financial problems quants are trying to solve they exist somewhere peripheral to true science, somewhere more applied. Try as they might to collect more data or generate different possible histories, quants are constrained by the inability to truly perform controlled experiments on the systems they study. The confusion of quantitative research with scientific research can actually lead to grave errors in the methodology of a quantitative researcher, as there are assumptions associated with scientific research that are severely violated by the nature of the historical or generated data upon which quants experiment and develop models. This disconnect is both perplexing and informative when it comes to effective methods in quantitative finance, and it is complex enough that I think it ought to be returned to in a later entry in this series to be dealt with in appropriate depth.

If a quant is not a scientist, what are they? Perhaps there are multiple suitable answers to this question, but I would like to pose a rather specific one that I think fits rather well, at least in my personal experience. In my mind quants are engineers. Specifically, quants are engineers concerned with the automation of the research process that determines the price of an asset. The models that quants build are often written and discussed in terms related to trading and markets (after all, these models are usually *used* to inform trading decisions or risk management decisions), but the underlying theory can equivalently be seen as a theory relating to the way in which the price of things change. It is important to avoid confusing **value** and **price** here: the former relates to the long term utility of some asset (the warmth that can be obtained by burning a log, or the chair that can be carved from it) while the latter (at least, in the sense of spot price) relates to the appropriate amount of value that one must surrender to take ownership of an asset *at present*.


(to be continued . . .)



[investopedia-quants]: https://web.archive.org/web/20180310005529/https://www.investopedia.com/articles/financialcareers/08/quants-quantitative-analyst.asp

